---
layout: post
title: "exploit.education Phoenix - Heap 0x2"
category: CTF 
tagline:
tags: [binary, exploitation, phoenix, wargame, ctf, learning]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Heap 2

Write-up for: [https://exploit.education/phoenix/heap-two/](https://exploit.education/phoenix/heap-two/).

<!--more-->

## The vulnerability

The goal of this challenge is trick the program into thinking that the user is authenticated.
This requires two preconditions to be true:

```
auth && auth->auth
```

`auth` needs to be a valid pointer and the value of `auth->auth` needs to be non-zero.
`auth` can be set by entering the string `auth`. This leads to allocation of memory on
the heap for the `auth` struct. The memory is zero-initialized and the string after the
auth command is copied to the `name` field (length-checked). Every time, the `auth` command
is issued again, new memory is allocated and assigned to the `auth` pointer variable.
Issuing the `reset` command will free the memory pointed to by the `auth` pointer.

There is a memory leak issue in the program. If the `auth` command is given multiple 
times without a corresponding `reset` call,
the allocated memory is leaked since the program has no way of freeing the memory.

However, the security issue here is more subtle. The `auth` pointer is never set to `NULL`.
This means, even if the memory pointed to by `auth` is freed, it still points to the memory.
Thus, the check if `auth` is not `NULL` will succeed. Then, the `auth` pointer is dereferenced
to access the `auth->auth` field. This is undefined behavior. Since this memory was freed,
it can be re-used by subsequent allocations.

When we issue the `service` command, the `strdup` function will also allocate memory. In
the used malloc implementation, the memory previously pointed to by `auth` will be reused,
but `auth` still points there. This way, via the `service` pointer, we can manipulate the
heap in a way that tricks the program in thinking `auth->auth != 0`. Let's see this in action:

```
user@phoenix-amd64:/opt/phoenix/amd64$ ./heap-two 
Welcome to phoenix/heap-two, brought to you by https://exploit.education
[ auth = 0, service = 0 ]
auth AAA
[ auth = 0x600e40, service = 0 ]
reset  
[ auth = 0x600e40, service = 0 ]
service A
[ auth = 0x600e40, service = 0x600e40 ]
login
you have logged in already!
[ auth = 0x600e40, service = 0x600e40 ]
```

First, `auth` and `service` are initialized to `NULL`. `auth AAA` allocates memory at `0x600e40` which is
freed by the `reset` call. However, `auth` still points to the memory. This memory is re-used in the subsequent
`service A` call. As you can see, `service` points to the same memory location!
The final call to `login` will now follow the stale `auth` pointer and we see the success message. Done!
We could confirm all this in GDB but since the program provides nice output we'll skip this exercise this time :).

## Additional links

[Use-after-free](https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/416.html)

[Stale pointer](http://www.qnx.com/developers/docs/qnxcar2/index.jsp?topic=%2Fcom.qnx.doc.neutrino.prog%2Ftopic%2Fhat_StalePointers.html)

